both as an official employee of A&M, but then after
that, a resident of the local community, and one
interested in A&M. What were the factors that
helped to make Mr. Rutter such a successful
president? I'll have to go back to it. When he came
here, he called a meeting of all the staff and
faculty in Ginehall. I'll never forget that. He
got up on the stage, and they introduced him and so
forth. He says now, I... You know and I know I'm not a
scholar. I don't claim to be. He said, I'm going to
be here. I'm going to do some things that I think can
help. And one of the main things I remember him
saying was, he said, I don't understand when we
bring freshmen in here, we get into graduate
schools. He said, this is the time of the change in
their life. We need to give them the best we have.
And I think it's one of the greatest things he ever
did. I agree. But now, I don't think the war, his
war, action had much to do with it. Most people
didn't know about it. He was just a man's man, I
think. He would talk to anybody. You know this.
He'd just visit with you. I wrote him a note. We had
one time Texas University threatened to come over
here and break up our final review. And I was at that
time with Stallings, worked coaching with Coach
Stallings. This was 1969, 70. And I went down to he
just he
just a
fine guy that he did not feel like he was superior to
anybody but he knew he could do anything right now
you left the university officially and then came
back Yeah. In 1970, Stallings, who was coaching
me, asked me to come back on his staff as the
recruiting partner. Okay. And I came back and
stayed with him until he got fired. All right.
Let's talk about those years. Okay. How had the NM
changed in 1970 from what you remembered it? Well,
again, like I said, I stayed on the campus half the
time, and it was just like I'd never left. That's
what's so strange. I never left the campus even
though I wasn't on the payroll. I was over there
playing handball or talking or stuff all the time.
But now we had women by then. We had the women, and I
was definitely against women. My daughter, who's
50 years old now, she could not go to Texas A&M
because of girls. And I think it's true, and you
know that when they took it to the Supreme Court
three times, we had women, and I didn't like that.
My wife, my present wife, both her daughters were
graduates of Texas A&M, and her son-in-law was a
graduate of Texas A&M. I think it's probably the
greatest thing that ever happened to us. But it was
the idea of having girls on this campus we just
couldn't buy. And I say publicly, and I'll stand on
the front porch of the MSC, that I think the girls
have a whole lot better attitude than the boys. You
walk across that campus and see his feet. Yes. And
you watch some of these jokers, men that are going
to take the A&M. I'm embarrassed. Like you said a
while ago, you thought he got too big. I agree with
you. When I interviewed Speaker Clayton about his
student days, he told me that he had been a strong
opponent of coeducation. And I said, well, sir,
why? And he said, because I thought the girls would
kill the spirit. And then he stopped and he said, do
the girls have Aggie spirits? And I then, about
what you just said, I said, sir, I believe that they
have even more pride than the boys do. And he
brightened up and he said, good, good. Then he
started telling me how many of his nieces and
granddaughters and so forth. I wish she could. I
wish Pauline could have gone to Texas. Thank you,
thank you. Now, of course, that's the big change
there, I guess. The big change to me is the size of
it. And we've got, what, 40,000, 42,000. We've got
2,000 courts. But you talk to people away from
here, in your place in Missouri or North Carolina,
they still think so. Because that's what they see
on television. That's what they see on the TV ads.
Let's see. Back to those Stallings days. Describe
Gene Stallings as the football coach then. Okay.
Frankly, I do not remember James Stallings
playing football with Brad Bryant. He was all
conference and all. But he wasn't, at least of
course John David stole everything. But I went,
when Stallings first came back, I refereed
football at Southwest Conference for 25 years.
And lots of times, we local officials would go down
and work the scrimmage games for the Aggies when
Bryant was here and all those guys. And I got to know
Stallings out there officiating the scrimmages.
And one day, we had a play, and I called the pass
interference, and he came charging me, just
maddering away at him, because I called him. And I
said, look, coach, you want me to call Mike Dower,
or do you want me to call him? He said, you're proud
of your job, but I'm proud of mine, too. And I've got
pride in my job, and I'm going to call this game. If
you don't want me, I'll leave right now. Well, I
thought, I know that guy, too. after that practice
I was walking off he came over and put his arm in my
shoulder it wasn't two weeks later that he sent one
of his assistant coaches to see if I could work with
him so when he came to jump on you this is when you
were coaching I mean when he was the head coach I was
officiating and I wasn't scared of him at all
because I'd seen about ten other coaches come
through and I learned to love that man as much as I
ever loved a man so I went to work for him and He was a
funny old boy. I'll tell you off of his thinking
stories, but I won't tell you because I don't want
to break it. All right, let's see. Now, who were the
key members of his staff? Well, Elmer Smith was his
assistant coach. He hired Elmer Smith to come down
here and coach. Elmer had been coaching up in
Arkansas. And then he had B. Powell, who had played
with him, and a guy named Bobby. Jimmy Bryant. He
had a guy named Lloyd Taylor who's still here in
college. He had a guy from over here at Franklin.
A lot of his staff were played with him. Pauline,
where's that picture of that coaching thing,
honey? Let me see that. I can't remember some of
those guys. I've got a picture. And he was... His
staff was comparatively young. They were all
young except Elmer, and Elmer was an old man. But
Elmer had coached with Barry Bryant when he was
here. And Barry Bryant left, went back home to
Alabama, and Elmer went with him. Elmer wasn't
happy there. He felt he made a mistake. So he came
back, and he stayed with Paul Schmeier, Jim
Meyers. And then when Elmer stayed with Fulberg
here. And then, of course... Elmer told me, he
said, Gene called him when he got the job. He said,
Elmer, you come with me. We're going to have a
dynasty at Texas A&M. Let me look here and see if I
can see those guys. Now, in terms of... Here's that
coaching staff right here. Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Right here. The... He ran the same, did he run by and
large the same offense and defense that Bryant had
run? Yeah, I guess. I wasn't that familiar with
that. Let me tell you about this stuff. Bear
Bryant, Coach Bear Bryant, when he was at Texas
A&M, he wore work shoes and he wore long khaki pants
to practice. Stallings wore work shoes and long
khaki pants. Stallings would not let any of his
coaches wear shorts. on the practice field.
Bryant didn't like it. I don't know how close
Stalin tried to ape or mimic Bryant. Everybody
says that because I didn't know Bear Bryant that
well. But
I don't know. They keep saying that's what hurt
him. I'll tell you what hurt him, but I won't tell
you on that thing. All right, let's go back to
Bryant. because you observed Bryant up pretty
close. Who selected Bryant to be the head coach?
Okay, Mr. Penberthy was dean of, was head of the
athletic council, and it was the athletic
council's job to fire and hire the coach. Mr.
Penberthy told me, he says, when the
prior coach left. Norton? No, it was the second,
and then the next one. But anyway, Mr. Penny, Mr.
Penberthy said that he and his group were
interviewing people like Blair at Army. They
interviewed Oklahoma Coast. He said, we
interviewed everybody we could. We didn't expect
to get them, but when the word came out, why didn't
you ask old Joe? Why didn't you ask him? We did. And
he says, I pick up the paper and lo and behold, I see
that Barry Bryant's been hired by the Board of
Regents, Board of Directors. Was there, as far as
you know, was there a particular board member? I
don't even know who it was. At that time, I probably
did, but I don't recall who it was. Not like when Bob
Bryant hired you. Did... What was his first
venture here? How did he arrive? He came in like a
hurricane. He later said that he had heard that if
you let the Aggies get too close to you, they'll
stab you in the back. So he shut down all
observation. He put a fence up where nobody could
watch practice. My office at that time was in
DeWare. And here came guys that I had known.
driving up in the big Cadillac, they would park and
come into my office, because they were kind of same
age as me, and say, do you think, Coach, I can see
Coach? They were even afraid to go down and try and
see, because his office was on the west side of Kyle
Field, up under the stands there, where the
dressing room was on the other side. And one time,
or several times, they'd go in there, and he'd say,
did you bring me a crossbar? No, Coach, you bring me
a crossbar, he won't come back to me. Everybody was
scared to death. And he was in his 40s? 40ish? Yeah,
he was a young man. Describe him physically. I'd
say he was probably 6'2", but in most people's
minds, he was about 6'10". And he was a well-built
old boy. I've got a picture of him in there
somewhere. At that time, the MSC was the main
hangout. Well, you were here. No. Yeah. The
hangout for coffee time. Everybody would go to
coffee at the MSC. Maybe. Bryant walked in there.
You go to a cafe, you go to a hotel, you go anywhere,
and I'll swear that 99% of the conversations were
about Bear Bryant every day. He dominated this
place. You've heard the expression, he walks in
the room and draws attention. Bryant walked like
John Wayne. He walked in the room and drew
attention and never said a word. Right now, he came
early in the calendar year You know, soon after
football season's over. And that first year, he
had really good recruiting success in bringing in
lots of freshmen. About 19 out of the top 20. I'll
tell you a story about that. And then he took the
varsity. He didn't take freshmen. He took the
varsity to Junction, didn't he? Yes. Okay. Go
ahead. Well, during the first year, he was 1-11, I
think. And towards the end of the year, he just quit
the varsity and took all of his freshmen. There's a
story that Colonel Frank Anderson told me. Frank
Anderson was track coach at Texas Indian for 48
years. He came here in the teens with Mr. Bible as
assistant coach with Mr. Bible. He and Mr. Bible
were like brothers. Mr. Bible left and went to
Nebraska, then came to Texas.
Colonel Anderson told me that all the athletic
directors got together one time in Austin with the
intent of getting this done. Mr. Colonel Andy
said, Mr. Bible walks in this room, Mr. Bible from
Texas walks in this room and says to these other
athletes, gentlemen, it's my understanding and
order to leave a fellow member of the Southwest
Conference. It must be unanimous. Is that being
the case? And I'll contend that what you said,
Texas University is the best university in the
world. I agree with that. Nobody like, nearly
hated him. Well, because he got old football
players. He bought them all. No question about
that. He bought John David. He bought Lloyd Paley.
He bought everything inside.
Describe what you know about the Junction. Or what
everybody else knows. They went down there and two
came back and won. I've heard scholars talk about
it. I have a good friend named Dave Smith. Dave
Smith is the only guy that went to Junction and left
that became a head football coach later. Now, he
took the sophomores, juniors, and seniors, not
the freshmen. I didn't know that. Well, I'm
guessing. I don't know. And a whole bunch of them
dropped out. Well, it said, Dolly said in his
little pocket, they went down in two buses and came
back in one. What the guys told me, some of them that
I talked to that left, they said we would leave at
night. We'd crawl out the window and go to the
highway and hitchhike to get out of there. And none
of them had the I wouldn't have had either to go to
Mr. Bryant and say, Coach, I can't handle this. I'm
leaving. They'd be afraid to see me. But they just
snuck off. And as you look back on it, do you think
that most people believe that he deliberately
wanted to drive some of those people off? I don't
know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know why he
took them. He said in one of his books I read, he said
he'd never do that again. Because he didn't do it
but once did. Yeah, yeah. I don't think it panned
out exactly. And didn't he lose some good
prospects? Probably did. Probably lost a lot of
people. He said, I'm not going to put stuff to that.
You couldn't do it today. Yeah. Oh, no way. No, no.
They probably lost six. If you talk to the guys that
stayed and they think it's fantastic, the guys
that left, they're ashamed. Yeah. So I don't know.
All right. In the years that he was here, did he
continue to be that kind of removed, separate
person? He would not. That's what I know of it. He
would not talk to anybody. The only friend he had,
good, close friend, this guy's got this student
factory out here, 121, big tag. He had a big home
down north of Miami. Whatever that is. But Bryant
did not. Bryant did not. Willie Zappalack was
assistant coach, and Willie and I played
together. He kept Willie Zappalack on the staff.
Ray George was the guy that was for him. He was the
only one that he kept, and he kept Willie because
Willie's been an Aggie. He had connections with
former students in that league for him. And Willie
said that if they went on these tours, they'd be
going for five weeks. And he said at night, he'd go
to his room at night. He said, I had very little
personal contact with him. Every one of his
coaches kept a, I understand, they kept a bag
packed in the office. He'd say, Barney, won't you
go talk to him? He was a very demanding man, but I
think the guys respected him. He could be mean.
Yeah, Bernath. Oh, yeah, Bernath Concrete.
That's right. And they were big buddies.
B-E-R-N-A-T-S. I think that's the only great
friend he had. And there was a guy at the North Gate
that had a... I guess it was a restaurant that he'd
go by there every morning and they'd call him. And
let's see. During those years, Morgan was
president part of those years, and then he left, so
there was no strong administrative... authority
like there would be with Rudder and later with Jack
Williams. Let me tell you something. Here's what
happened. You know the name Jones Ramsey. Is this
going to happen? You're going to edit this. Wait,
wait, wait. Let me turn this off. I said, no, sir, I
don't want you to do that. I wasn't about to have you
get off. This is the first thing. We've got a
Saturday football game, and I get blamed for it.
Well, thereafter, any time they had games
scheduled in the office of G. Ronnie White, they
would have a bunch of basketball where I used my
footballs. He would have one of his coaches call me
and ask me. Well, I was about to say no, but I did
appreciate him calling me and asking me. He didn't
step on little people. He just squashed big
people, I guarantee you. Now, I've heard that
Jerry Claiborne was the coach and member of the
coaching staff who went to the faculty to talk
about grades and so forth. Is that right? As you
understand, is that correct? I don't know. I knew
Jerry real well, but we played handball all the
time. What I heard was that he would come to chat
with them, that he was always very, very
thoughtful, always very conscientious, always
very kind, patient, and that quite often, as he
would be chatting, he would check his watch, and
he'd pull his pocket watch out, he would always
flip his Phi Beta Kappa key. I don't know about
that. Where they could see it. But he was a heck of a
nice guy. And that he always gave them a very nice,
positive impression, and that there was no
high-handedness, that they got any impression of
high-handedness from Coach Clayton. Yeah, yeah.
Chris Brown, you know him? Sure, sure. He told me
that... He says, I said before Bryant came here, he
says he's not going to run me. He was sharing that
with me. He's not going to run me. And he came on
Bryant's biggest performance. He'd done
anything Bryant. Bryant just charmed him to
death. And Bryant did not. You talk to people and
tell me one time that Bryant never talked to
anybody. When they'd go recruit, Bryant didn't
recruit. He just sat there. He just did it by
osmosis, I guess. But he let other people build up
his reputation.
Now, were folks like you aware that he was about to
leave? No. That was a complete lie. Well, let me
back off. We thought that he was having trouble
here because of recruiting. Mm-hmm. I think I was
surprised when he says, when Mother calls, when
you come back to Alabama. And there was mixed
emotions about it, I think. Okay. All right, let's
go back then now and do your student days. Okay.
We're not freshmen. Let's see. You
were telling me about why you came here in the first
place. How did you get to College Station for that
first visit? Darius Mosher. Darius Mosher's
parents lived in Stephenville. I had never heard
of Texas A&M until I was in high school. You know,
I'd heard of it, but I didn't think about it. But I
loved Darius Mosher like a big brother to me, and
I'd never seen a big football game. I had gone to
Fort Worth to see Sammy Ball, some old people play.
But they brought me down here several times when we
would come to watch A&M play, and I'd stay over in
the dorm with a guy named Cecil Ballew, who played
baseball here, who was later dean of men at
Crawford State University. And I'd come down to
them, and I came to A&M and watched some football
games, and I got where I could tell each player just
by the way he walked. You can't do that today. But
they had some individual deals about them. So when
I was being recruited by several schools, and I
didn't know what to do, and I went to Rice because
they recruited me strongly and actually a guy had
offered me some help that his brother-in-law was
mayor of Stephenville at that time. And so I went
down there but it didn't turn out so I came back up
here. The first time I just came down was Derrick
Moser's parents. Right and so and you enrolled in
the fall of? 1941. 41 and A&M's football program
was very, very, very strong then. Yeah we won the
conference that year and had won it. 39 were the
champions. 40, they won it in 41. But in 38, they
nearly got fired. If it hadn't been for Bert
Clopper, it would have been, because he came to
take care of, he wasn't at the time, because he was
Martin's big boss. Okay. What was your, when you
visited the campus first, what was your
impression of the people you encountered? I was so
scared to death my freshman year. I don't remember
much, but I don't know that it was any different
than anywhere else. I don't know. Most of the guys
at that time were 60% or more of the boys would take
them and work with them through school. Yeah, but
did you think that this, when your first
impression, did you think this was a friendly
place? Yes, definitely. And the one thing that
made it friendly, I think, was uniform. We had
Jewish boys, we had Catholic boys, we had
Protestant boys, we had rich boys, we had poor
boys, but everybody was the same. The uniform
leveled it out. I didn't have anything. My parents
didn't have anything like most kids did. But we
were well off the next day. And I have understood,
after chatting with people like you and so forth
and hearing the recollections, that those
differences of background of religion,
ancestry, and money almost vanished, you were,
once you put on that uniform, once you became a
member of the group. Yeah, you were an Aggie. And
everybody got a nickname. What was your nickname?
Well, I always went Barney. Barney is a nickname.
Oh, it is? Okay. What is your? Fowler Barnett,
B-A-R-N-E-T. Oh, Fowler Barnett. Fowler was my
mother's maiden name. My first wife's father was a
farmer, and he probably never saw an athletic
contest in his life. Okay. And he was listening on
the radio when I came down here, and they called me
Fowler Wells. And he asked his daughter, he says,
why is Barney Fowler so much? And I didn't know my
name was Fowler until I got down here with the first
tip. But I didn't have a nickname. Share with the
machine some of the distinctive nicknames that
you recall of either friends or Aggie nicknames of
friends or faculty or anybody. I wish I had that.
Pauline, where's that list I picked up one time?
One time at our meeting, this meeting. I sat down
and wrote down every faculty guy that I could think
of. Let me give you these. Okay, first of all, there
was Bigfoot Jackson. These are faculty. Did he
have big feet? I guess, I don't know. Wheezy Clark.
You know Wheezy Clark? Wheezy Clark was the guy.
Let's go back to when Mr. Gilchrist was a civil
engineer. There's a place over here called Billy
Goat Bridge, right across from Pat Olsen's home.
You know that lake? Pat, Mr. Gilchrist, had a city
connection. He made them drain it because of
Skeeter. Wheezy Clark had developed all that
land. And that was the cause of that big rebellion
and 20 years later over on the campus. Because
Wheezy Clark and Mr. Bryan, Travis Bryan, hated
Barry Bryan. I mean, Mr. Gilkins. Wheezy because
he messed up on that play. And Mr. Bryan because
when he built the College Station State Bank,
Gilkins started putting money in there and taking
Mr. Bryan. And they two instigated that thing with
a guy named Sam Williams who was a student and a
football player. And they're the guys that
started that whole mess. Orster Joe Gammon.
Gammon, yes, because he'd clear his throat. Big
Track Buck. Notes Dance. Yes. Head End Jones.
Steppin' Half Hedges. Screamin' Al Nelson. I had
him in class. I know what he was. Jumpin' Jim
Potter. Jim Potter. Oh. Dusty Colford. Mm-hmm.
Cube Foot, Cube Root Kent. Cube Root Kent. Cube
Root Kent. And Square Root Jackson. Yeah. Blue
Brook Benton. Camp Basie, I don't know who that is.
Dan the man, Dan the great point man, Dan Russell.
Not Dan, Dr. Dan Russell. Dr. Dan, I had him in
classes, yeah. Cigar Davis.
But those were Smokey, now these are guys that I
think were really ought to be settled. Bear
Bryant, Smokey Harper, Dr. Dobbs, Ivy League
Taylor. You remember him? He gave Stallings more
to pay off. And he and I used to play tennis. You
know, he'd press the tennis player one time. But
he'd come up in the stands when we'd work now in
college. He'd sit up there with his shirt off. And
Stallings would pick it up for Grandma. He
wouldn't leave. He was a faculty prop. Stallings
hated that guy because he would go, oh, love, oh,
love. Taylor would egg him on, and I understand he
turned out to be one of those people. Nick
Callahan, Bull Boatman, remember Boatman? Jocko
Robertson,
Jock Woods. These are some names we picked up. All
right, what about some of your buddies, your
classmates? Well, I'm trying to think. Most of
them, let's see. Okay, Whiskey Cure. Let's get to
Cure. Wayne Cure was a guy who played football at
Tarleton, and they claimed he kept a little pint in
his little pocket up there on his shirt, and he'd
stick it through a straw. And I played with him,
Wayne Cure, and gosh, I can't think. Let's see. All
right, let me. I can't think of those guys. All
right, were there any? Bill Henderson, Boots
Henderson. Did the Jewish kids have a nickname? I
don't know. Hispanic? No. I don't think they mean
Hispanic either. Okay. Fat guys? Short guys?
Jelly Steinman was an old boy from over here at
Blastrop. Later he was a colonel and he was a fat
boy, Jelly Steinman. And... Hank Goldberg was his
nickname, his name was Henry. Of course, Buddy
Denton was that dude.
Do you agree with me that these nicknames, in fact,
were terms of endearment? Yes, definitely were.
They may have been kind of backhanded. Okay, your
freshman year, where did you live? I lived over,
the athletes lived together my freshman year, and
we lived in dorm 12. over in what is now the court
area. Did you have what we now call a scholarship?
Yes, we had a full scholarship. We got room, board,
bus, tuition, and $5 a month for London. Okay. And
then about how much more money did you spend a
month? $5. My parents would send me $5 a month. Oh,
so $5 more. Yeah. Okay. Yeah. And you came, that
first fall, you arrived about what date? Probably
1st or 2nd. So football practice started about
that? We started practice immediately. And how
many freshmen were there on the team? About 110.
But there weren't that many on scholarship? Oh,
no, no, no. And do you remember the routine of the
first workouts? I remember the routine of
everything. First of all, we would never go in the
dressing room to the upperclassmen had left.
Never. Because they'd get up there and beat our
butts. And the coaches would sit there and watch
you. And we would stay on the field until the
upperclassmen had cleaned up and left and gone.
But unfortunately, we all went back to the same
dormitory. I cleaned up a room for a guy named
Darius Moser, who's a dear friend of mine. And
Jim...
My routine every morning, I'd get up And I'd go up
and clean their tunes. I'd shine their shoes. And
unfortunately, one of them wanted to get up and one
of them didn't. And so I'd have to wake one of them up
and not wake the other up. I was going to get my butt
beat the other way. Then I would take their laundry
out and I would go over in the mess hall and bring the
breakfast to them back and do it. Now that was every
morning we did that. Was that kind of common? Oh,
everybody, they had every upper class had room
order. Well, I know that, but that bringing the
meal back. If they wanted, you did what they
wanted. And we just understood that's what you're
supposed to do. Okay. Classes didn't begin until
late in September. Did you all have two-a-day
workouts? Yes, we worked out two days. And the head
coach was Homer Norton. Homer Norton. Describe
Coach Norton as a person. Well, Coach Norton as a
fiscal or otherwise? Coach Norton was a very aloof
man to me. Now, to some people he was not, but he did
not, I think if he saw me on the street, he wouldn't
know who I was. Never spoke to him, I don't guess. On
the field, it was different. But I found out later
that Coach Norton, his last year, this was, of
course, a freshman, he didn't have any good
management.